[Music]
welcome back to the stronger by science
podcast I'm Greg Knuckles I'm pack and
I'm Milo and we have another and uh in
in many ways a final great episode for
you guys today um if you didn't listen
to the last episode of the podcast I did
have an announcement up top that this
will be the final um episode in the kind
of like standard run of the podcast for
the foreseeable future that doesn't mean
it's dead forever doesn't mean we might
not pop into your feed with a ROM
episode here or there at some point uh
but after this episode the podcast is
going on in indefinite Hiatus uh but uh
announcement up top here if you do just
like getting stronger by science audio
content even though the podcast is going
away um we're going to start doing a
monthly audio Q&A for for uh people on
the
newsletter so if that is something that
interests you um and you're not
subscribed to the newsletter already you
can go to Stronger by science.com
newsletter uh to sign up to the
newsletter and uh when those monthly Q&A
episodes drop you will be notified of it
uh and if you're not a newsletter
subscriber already and you're thinking
like like uh I've I've signed up to a
lot of newsletters and I think it's
going to be cool but for the most part
they're just spamming me with a bunch of
ads and it's a waste of my time and
clutters my inbox uh that is not
something you need to worry about with
the stronger by science newsletter it's
literally like
95% plus just sending you informative
content so uh breaking down new studies
um giving practical training tips we're
going to have the monthly audio q&as and
then
like maybe once or twice a year if we're
running to sale on coaching or running
to sale on a product we'll let you know
about it but like the the ratio of just
getting informative content to uh to
marketing related stuff it really is
like 10:1 20 to1 maybe even more so uh
yeah it's it's good stuff and if you'd
like to continue getting audio content
from us uh check out the
newsletter um
so this is uh like I said on the last
episode this is going to be a Q&A
episode um so a lot of y'all send in
questions and we're going to answer them
here so uh without further ado
um do do one of you guys want to want to
kick us off I want to say a few final
words before oh yeah yeah go for it keep
in mind we sure we are I don't know what
we are classed as temporary guests the
permanent uh co-hosts or CEOs and CFOs
whatever you want to call us but we were
listeners of the podcast first and
foremost and for many years this podcast
was um a big source of uh education for
both myself and Milo we and looked
forward to every episode U on this
podcast another competing podcast but we
all know that this was the first Fitness
podcast ever and um yeah it's the end of
an era I want to say thank you Greg for
rocking the podcast cuz yeah sure we've
been uh rocking it alongside you for the
past um year or so but uh for many years
this was was an amazing source of
information entertainment and a good
companion on some dark days and that was
reflected also by many of the messages
that came in so in addition to the
questions a lot of people expressed
their gratitude and stuff but I want to
thank you and
lince and obviously trxx who was um a
part of this before but also thank the
people that were listening and big hug
to everyone it was a mixed sort of a
goodbye message but yeah it's been
emotional man strong by science awesome
resource awesome uh podcast and uh yeah
Long Live SBS podcast I guess
hashtag free to the
Ral well thanks man I I really
appreciate it that that means a
lot and just to Echo pack and make you
feel even worse about this since you
hate compliments um I hope everything
pack says If Ever I was asked hey I want
to learn more about lifting and fitness
where should I go I would say the Strong
by science podcast and although we won't
be able to say it anymore I do have
faith that the monthly Q&A episodes will
carry on the spirit of this podcast very
well um so yeah it's been very
gratifying having the opportunity to be
a part of this and for one last time
let's get into some questions all right
starting with
Frank hey guys first of all I just want
to say thank you for all of the
incredible Fitness content over the
years been listening since the very
beginning and haven't asked a question
up until now so I'm going to try to make
this one count it seems like strength
more so than muscle mass is more
strongly correlated with both life and
health span so my question is beyond
hand grip strength is there a better way
to assess overall strength as it relates
to longevity for example could we assess
lower body strength pushing strength Etc
in percentiles like putting someone in
the 64 percentile for lower body
strength 71st for pushing
Etc and how would that correlate with
longevity thanks again not sure where
I'll be able to find out how much an
elephant can deadlift now but I'll be
make sure to follow you guys wherever
you go
next uh yeah so that's that's a good
question uh as a bit of context for this
one for uh for for people for whom it it
may sound like this is coming a little
bit out of the blue there's a pretty
robust body of literature suggesting
that uh strength is a predictor of
longevity in that people who are
stronger at 55 60 years old tend to live
a little bit longer have a longer
lifespan and health span from that point
than people who are weaker at 55 60
years old uh but most of that research
uses hand grip strength as their test
for strength for determining the
Stronger versus weaker people um and so
Frank is
asking H basically just like is is that
the best metric are there other metrics
that one could use that would work
better and I suspect so um like I I
don't know I don't see a reason
to suspect that hand grip strength would
correlate with longevity but like knee
extension strength wouldn't um for
instance but I do
also think that
essentially I don't know so like
H this this to me is one of those things
where I suspect that you could take more
strength measurements and probably
improve predictive accuracy a bit like I
I can't imagine that a combination of
hand grip strength and knee ex extension
strength and isometric chest press
strength um you want to be able to build
a model to uh predict longevity even
better than you can with just hand grip
strength alone but I
also question the utility of that a
little bit um
um for a couple
reasons one is that unless
you like unless you're working for like
an insurance agency as an
actuary um
the like Precision of the
estimate probably doesn't matter that
much for you I guess so um like this is
this is something we've talked about a
little bit as it relates to like body
composition assessments how like on a
group level we can estimate body comp
quite well on an individual basis
estimates tend to be rather rough um
even with something like dexa for
instance and the same thing kind of
applies here like if research suggests
that having like 80th percentile hand
grip strength or any other strength
measure if that was predictive of um
like eight additional years of longevity
or whatever the confidence interval on
that is going to be huge and like the
prediction interval like range of
individual values like not even kind of
like range of where the population
average is likely to fall like the
individual spread is going to be much
much bigger and so like I do think
that you could get more precise
population level estimates with more
strength measures but the range of in
individual prediction values is still
going to be so broad that for an
individual I don't know that it would
have that much
utility um and the other thing that I
would
say is that
um one of the things that you see when
you look at the longevity research is
that strength itself is a pretty good
predictor of
longevity but
um the the research looking at at the
degree to which um resistance training
and especially the amount of resistance
training you do is predictive of
longevity is like quite a bit weaker or
at least not suggestive of the exact
same relationship so like the the the
epidemiological research looking at um
like how much resistance exercise is
predictive of increased longevity it's
up to like I don't know like 90 to 100
in 20 minutes of total resistance
training per week whereas if the
relationship between strength and
Longevity was strictly causal you would
expect that to be like basically the
more resist distance training you do the
longer you live and and I think that to
some extent the strength measures
themselves are kind of a bit of a proxy
for
how like how strong and muscular someone
like quote unquote naturally is um and
so like basically the idea that when a
metric becomes a Target it stops being
as good of a metric um it's not that I
think that lifting is going to
negatively impact longevity but I do
think when when I hear a lot of lifters
ask about this um the the
inflection tends to be or at least like
the thing underpinning it seems to be a
lot of times like hey if I get as strong
as possible like if I train really hard
and get as as jacked and strong as
possible by 60 years old uh that's
that's going to make me live a lot
hunger right and like I'm not convinced
about like just how causal that is again
because we don't see as stronger of a
relationship between amount of
resistance training someone does and
Longevity
um a b is like most of the research
looking at strength and Longevity kind
of splits things out by quiles and like
the top two cor tiles tend to do a lot
better than the bottom cortile and
sometimes the top cortile is a little
bit better than the second cortile
sometimes it's not but like uh if you
think about just when you're walking
down the street look at everyone around
60 years old and just be like hey like
what
is how jacked is the 60-year-old that
I'm seeing that seems to be more
muscular and in better shape than three
out of four of them and if you're in a
room of 100 just 60 year olds in the
general population the 75th percentile
there is not that strong and that
muscular like I do think there's some
diminishing returns there
um
and yeah yeah I I don't I don't know
like I basically to to answer the
question I do think that you could
probably
um you could probably on a population
level get slightly more precise
predictions if you did have more metrics
of strength rather than just hand grip
strength but one of the reasons I think
hand grip strength is good is that it
does help isolate a little bit more just
kind of
like just like
how strong someone is like inherently
versus um like trying to pick up on on
training effects cuz I do I do think
those two things are like considerably
different um or at least like meaningful
meaningfully different to some extent um
and just to just to put like explain
that a little bit more like why why that
distinction matters is
like the the biggest reason um or like
one of the big reasons why it is helpful
to be strong from a longevity
perspective strong and muscular but but
more so strong but yeah kind of both is
that like
basically you want to be able to keep
moving to live a long time like moving
is good for you being able to be
independent take care of yourself do
activities of daily living and maintain
high enough levels of activity to
maintain high enough levels of Fitness
that you can just like kind of be in
good shape so if something bad happens
you get some you get sick you get some
type of disease like your body is robust
enough to fight it off um but like the
way that losses in physical function
tend to occur with aging is like there
is a bit of a gradual decline but in
terms of like end of life stuff so not
talking about changes that people
experience from like their 40s to their
50s but um you know when people go from
still being able to lead healthy active
lives to like quite bad shape and you
get the feeling that like end of life
stuff is coming up pretty soon most most
of the time like that kind of last stage
there is arrived at in in kind of a
chunk like someone is in decent shape
they're doing okay and then they get
some sort of illness they have an
extended stay in the hospital whatever
and like they lose a lot of strength and
a lot of function in that process
and they just struggle to get it back
and
like like their their Fitness kind of
takes a big step down and that's like a
fairly permanent Decline and like the
the reason that like sort of natural
strength levels and this also applies to
like aerobic fitness as well like V2 Max
is a predictor of longevity um like the
the same principle applies that I've
been talking about with strength like V2
Max is a strong predictor of longevity
but there's a weaker relationship
between volume of intense aerobic
training and Longevity than you would
expect if if that was like a directly
causal relationship as well and I I
think it's because like essentially
those big big setbacks are like the
thing that really are are like shaving a
lot of years off the life there at the
end and I do think think that the the
strength Association the V2 Max
Association is is a bit like people who
are just like naturally stronger or just
like naturally have higher levels of of
aerobic fitness independent of exercise
are the people who who are who just like
find it easier to bounce back from
things like that a little bit easier
where like you know if you're if you're
strong because you exercise like an
absolute madman all the time that's
awesome and if you spend three months in
the hospital you're going to lose a lot
of muscle and a lot of strength and if
you're 75 already it might
be difficult to build a lot of that back
if you're someone who's like all like
almost as strong and almost as muscular
with considerably less exercise if you
have to take that same 3 months stay in
the hospital you'll probably lose quite
a bit less while you're in and like
since you weren't having to do that much
to maintain what you had previously it
it will be probably a little bit easier
to get more of it back um and so yeah
like I think I think hand grip strength
is good because it it does help isolate
a little bit more that kind of
like um sort sort of like it it's it's a
bit more of an independent measure of
strength than something that like people
in the gym are going to be specifically
training for cuz like you you do improve
your grip by rowing doing pull Downs
deadlifts whatever but like most people
aren't training their grip super hard
like it's not uh it's not like a core
focus of training for most people and so
for that reason I do think it makes for
a a pretty good strength assessment for
kind of like longevity estimation
purposes so I don't know how directly
that answered Frank's question but those
are just some of some of my thoughts on
the
topic POV you just asked Greg hey how's
your day going um but I wanted to give
um sort of not tldr response but more of
a like my opinion is is that I don't
know if it's useful to look for a
specific metric um uh in terms of
strength and Longevity given the fact
that my my bet
is my thinking is that if you're
engaging in resistance training until
your older age and you're doing plenty
of stuff and you know keeping
relatively strong in the gym or at least
doing your best to get stronger over
time and you've been doing so for a
while it's likely that you're getting a
lot if not all the benefits from
resistance training regardless of
whether um maybe you know your grip
strength is in a certain percentile or
whatever would you agree with that sort
of sort of uh that sort of view in terms
of like practical applications just
continue lifting and it's likely that
you're not missing out on much yeah
pretty much yeah I think um I think if
you're getting in the gym two or three
times a week
for yeah like a a total of like 90 to
120 Minutes of resistance training and
getting after it pretty hard while
you're in there I think uh I think I
think your ducks are in a row from that
perspective um and like
the um like like like I mentioned like
when a when a metric becomes a goal it
ceases being a good metric like I do I
do I do not think that if someone
specifically trains their grip strength
to get themselves into a higher grip
strength percentile that's going to
directly and causally make them live
longer and I guess what I was getting at
a little bit with like assessing other
metrics of strength that may be more
directly related to the types of things
that lifters would be training I think
that's like selecting a metric that is
already a goal where like whatever
Association you found would would in
part be picking up sort of inherent
differences in strength and would in
part be picking up training effects so
it would be like not doing quite as good
of a job of of isolating strength as
like an independent variable um and sort
of like the same thing where where if
they found a stronger Association
between knee extension strength and
Longevity then grip strength and
Longevity uh I think it's good to train
lower body obviously but I don't think
like going out of your way to get your
knee extension strength from like the
80th percentile to the 99th would like
have that strong of a direct effect on
longevity like yeah yeah I don't know I
don't know I hope I hope some of that
made sense made a lot of
sense uh um anything to add Milo yeah I
mean just like with V2
Max I do think a lot of what Greg said
makes sense like hey if you're genetics
and your lifestyle overall mean that
you're not in those bottom 20 30 40
percentiles that's probably a good thing
but whether or not that means that
someone should train to like purely
maximize strength maximize longevity or
whether you need to have an like an ABS
L High V2 Max to maximize longevity I am
a lot more skeptical of and
so because percentiles for strength I
think are quite heavily dependent
on genetics for instance like not
entirely but pretty heavily dependent on
genetics um especially once you get into
the top sort of 10 percentiles or so I'm
not sure I would ever advise someone to
chase a higher percenti for strength in
the aim of maximizing longevity I would
rather just recommend hey based on
literature getting into the gym for an
hour or two a week it's going to do you
some good for health and ditto for
overall activity but I wouldn't really
worry about percental I think that can
be helpful from a public health
perspective and research perspective but
when it comes to actually telling
you you need to be doing this I think
you can just refer to oh I should be
doing some exercise it's good for you
and kind of look good at that but yeah
that's the uh that's my stance very
boring stance very simple stance but
hey no I'm I'm 100% on board with that
yeah I think uh I think even even like
there basically just there's a
distinction between saying like stronger
people and people in better aerobic
shape tend to live longer that does not
necessarily mean that if you do
everything within your power to get as
strong as possible and maximize your
aerobic fitness that the direct gains
you see in longevity will be as large of
an effect as kind of those population
level Trends CU part of what they're
picking up is training effects and part
of what they're picking up is just kind
of like inherent inter inter individual
differences um okay yeah let's let's go
ahead and move on to the next one
this um this listener wanted to remain
anonymous they specifically asked to
remain anonymous
so Mark Smith says now I'm joking that's
not their name or is it I have a
question about how weightlifting impacts
body weight I have been deadlifting with
a professional trainer two times a week
for six years and I have deadlifted in
those sessions 90% of the time we have
used Progressive overload to build
strength and muscle but I noticed that
my body weight has never really been
more than 5 lbs less than my one
repetition maximum I have also found
that I struggle a lot less now to
increase my one Rim it takes less time
and what feels like less effort
alongside the body weight gain my wam is
245 lbs and I currently weighed just
under 240 lbs in the last two years I
did develop bch eating Tendencies and
other body image issues which have
definitely impacted my body weight but I
was wondering if the demand on my body
to lift the heaviest I can two times per
week is a deterrent to intentional
weight loss can the demand to hit my 1
RM weekly have that much of an effect on
my body defend my current weight and
kind of induce weight gain when I'm
trying to progressively
overload do you want to lead off on this
one Milo I rambled way too much on the
first question no you're good uh
sure
so the most honest answer I can give is
that to my knowledge there is no effect
that would
directly like resolve that issue to my
knowledge lifting heavy and going going
higher in terms of percentage of your
max shouldn't
inherently make weight loss more
difficult now directionally you could
argue that going too heavy too often
might reduce your energy expenditure
ever so slightly like if you're doing
higher volume whack maybe you'd burn an
extra 50 calories but that difference in
energy expenditure isn't going to cause
any meaningful differences in weight
loss so just on principle I don't think
that hitting your Wonder Max twice a
week or weekly is going to have any
effect effectively on your weight loss
it's like I got to do more so with other
factors specifically with overall energy
expenditure and overall energy intake
that's the the boring answer and I would
love if Greg had
any anything more unique or interesting
to say about it because maybe I'm
missing
something uh yeah
I I'm wondering how how mean to be not
not to the person asking the question
but to their trainer um honestly it I
think you you need to find a new
trainer
um and so that's that's coming from a
couple things one is
uh it sounds like you're that they're
having you work up to a one rep max
deadlift weekly which I don't know how
much utility that has for you honestly
um and part of the reason I say that is
and like I do not mean this at all in a
judgmental way
um if you've
been if you've been training for six
years consistently and your deadlift is
within 5 pounds of your body weight um
that's tough um and like
I'll I don't know so like part of my
answer to
this part of part of why I'm thinking
this is just like knowing our audience
demographics uh a bit if this is an
older woman I retract that and that's a
very good deadlift if this is a younger
woman who weighs around 240 or a man
under 70 who weighs around
240 um obviously strength genetics vary
between people but
like after six years of
training most most people are going to
have a better deadlift than that um
especially at that body weight if if
they've been training pretty hard so um
like I it and I'm I'm not assuming it's
like a lack of effort on the question
askers part it just like there's not
like a ton of context in this question
but the the vibe I get is that your
trainer sucks honestly um and that it
may not be a terrible idea to try to
find a new trainer uh so that's kind of
the most direct and actionable piece of
advice I would give to the person asking
this question um as it relates
to the the questions about um um whether
trying to go heavy and get stronger can
um induce weight gain or make it more
difficult to lose weight I don't think
directly physiologically that's the case
um I'm not I'm not even going to touch
on the binge eating disorder part that's
a conversation to have with an RD um but
in terms
of in terms of kind of like
psychological impacts I guess of weight
loss one of the things that I that I've
personally experienced myself and have
heard from other powerlifters like
people really focused on maximal
strength trying to get as as strong as
possible is that um weight loss can can
for some people be a little bit of a
head [__] because you're trying to get
stronger and
um you know it's easier to continue
getting stronger when your weight is
staying the same or going up like when
you're in an energy Surplus uh not that
it's impossible to get stronger in a
deficit but especially if you're trying
to cut quite a bit of weight um it like
at some point your strength plateaus and
might start going down especially if you
have a a pretty fair bit of training
experience and as as someone who has
experienced that you can you can look at
like your Wilk score or your uh ipf
points or whatever the [__] uh scaled
strength metric you won't but like if
you used to squat
xbs and you tried that in the gym and it
didn't go up and now your max is like 20
lbs lower even if like relatively it's
higher they're like if if you're the
person if you're the type of person
that's just really wired to want to hit
bigger numbers like that can that can be
like psychologically difficult um for
for a lot of people I think so as a bit
of
advice related to like exercise
selection to maybe
make those psychological aspects of of
weight loss a little bit easier it can
help a lot to do more body weight
training where you know maybe your bench
press goes down a little bit but the
number of push-ups you can do or the
number of dips you can do goes up
because you have less body weights
you're moving around you know like maybe
the amount of weight you can use
for some sort of rowing exercise
stagnates or goes down but the number of
pull-ups you can do increases um strict
step-ups instead of like focusing as
much on on 1 RM squats like they're like
a focus on body weight exercises or at
least like including more body weight
exercises in a program can I think help
a lot with motivation when you're losing
weight and maybe your max strength
starts going down a little bit because
it does like it gives you a performance
metric that goes up when you lose weight
or at least like weight loss helps to
facilitate
so um yeah I'm not sure if that
necessarily applies
in the question askers scenario like I
again I don't
know I'm I'm not even going to take a
guess as how that relates to binge
eating disorder but just for people that
struggle psychologically to get in like
a weight loss mindset when trying to
improve their performance and get
stronger um i' I found that to be
helpful and I I think a lot of other
people do as
well well yeah I mean wanting to be
anonymous backfired a bit here cuz uh it
would have allowed us to sort of I guess
um have a bit more context cuz I think
we could guess the at least the sex of
the listener but I assume that they
don't want that given the anonymity um
but that was a really solid
response all right moving on to the next
question by faras they ask for
hypertrophy how important is resistance
curve versus range of motion used du
length and partial versus a full range
of motion matter more or less when an
exercise maximized 10 ion and or
external moment arms at Short versus
long muscle lengths the critique of the
new uh full R versus length and partial
study by certain someone says no
exercises really maximize tension at
longer
lengths uh could this have played a
major role in the results what do we
think yeah I can hit us off on this one
again this is a couple of questions
baked into
one um four hypertrophy how important is
resistance curve versus range of motion
used I don't know that we can
conclusively answer that or anywhere
close to it at this stage like we have a
few studies looking at the effects of
resistance curve on hypertrophy like we
have a study by Nunes and colleagues
where they compared cable pracher curls
to barbell pracher curls where with the
setup used they had less resistance in
the stretch with the cable Prater curl
and more resistance in the stretch with
a water prach curl and vice versa for
the shorten position in that study for
instance no real differences in growth
but then we have studies that manipulate
multiple variables at once like for
example a study by zeita cordine
colleagues where they compare the
incline curl to the pretr curl where for
the biceps the incline curl places them
in a more stretched position but there's
also less resistance at the bottom of an
incline curl versus at the bottom of a
preure curl meanwhile preure curl does
present greater resistance at the bottom
of the rep but because the shoulder is
slightly flexed the biceps are being
trained in a more shortened
position and in that study for instance
bicep hypertrophy or elbow flexors if I
recall correctly was slightly greater
from preacher curls but then now we have
a conference abstract uh comparing these
two exercises again by my colleagues
specifically using MRI to look at all of
the elbow flexors individually from the
most proximal side possible to the most
distal side possible showing that
actually incline curls were slightly
better for hypertrophy for the biceps
whereas preacher curs were slightly
better fire py for the remaining elbow
flexors
so the point I'm trying to make is that
is almost all of the literature we have
on the topic which is not a lot and of
the literature we have there's
somewhat conflicting results in that
some studies will find that hey more
resistance beats out more stretch for
hypertrophy others will find the
opposite some won't even find an effect
of resistance curve at all like that uh
Nuna study where they compare the
barbell preacher curl to the cable
preacher
curl my hunch is that both are somewhat
important um but whether or not one is
more important than the other I couldn't
tell you at this stage I think
that for you to get maximum benefit from
lengthen training you at least need to
get a decent stretch whether you need a
maximum stretch we just don't know yet
and I do think some resistance in the
stretch like I don't think
that the resistance provided in Incline
cross for instance I'm not sure if
that's sufficient to maximize
hypertrophy of the AL flexors at the
bottom um so yeah not a very
satisfactory answer but that is the only
answer that I could actually give at
this stage um before we move on Greg
thoughts no yeah I I wholly agree I do
um like this this is this is a topic
that
it confuses me a bit when I see people
make very confident declarations on
social media uh where where people would
be like oh like the you know this uh
like if if you're trying
to
um like benefit from training at longer
muscle links like you absolutely need to
select exercises that maximize the
tension the muscles are exposed to at
those longer muscle lengths
and like like you said there's not that
much research on the topic and the
research that does exist is pretty mixed
and I'm just like what why are you so
confident about this like I don't think
that level of confidence is Justified
like I I do think that
um like I do very strongly suspect that
if you were dealing with an exercise
where the resistance curve was like
basically no uh no challenge at long mus
links I do think that's probably not
going to be ideal so like I'm I'm going
to reveal my background here as more on
the strength side of things than the
hypertrophy side of things by the first
example that came to mind here uh I'm
sure other people would think of uh an
example of uh some some exercise that
you would set up with like cables to
manipulate resistance curves or whatever
but the first thing that comes to mind
for me is like squatting obviously with
straight weights versus like only band
resistance where like if you went really
hard on the squat and all of the
resistance came from bands such that in
the hole the bands are completely slack
and you have like no resistance at all
and it only starts ramping up as you go
through the concentric I don't think
that's going to be ideal for hypertrophy
like even if you're matching the muscle
links you're training because there's so
little resistance there at long muscle
links H yeah I don't think that's going
to be the best thing in the world for
Quad growth like I think that's probably
going to be worse than straight weight
where you do have like greater
resistance at longer muscle links but uh
I don't like I'm not aware of any strong
and consistent evidence that you
necessarily need to go out of your way
to maximize the tension that your
muscles are under at long muscle lengths
like as as long as as long as there's
some significant degree of tension my
understanding is that that's sufficient
or at least there's no strong reason to
think that that's not sufficient so I
don't know it it is just one of those
things where I I see a lot of people who
seem extremely confident that the
resistance curve is going to make like a
huge difference and like I'm not
convinced of that
because I'm not aware of uh that much of
that much research to back it
up yeah and if anything black Bill take
the study uh the to study on the topic H
train hard do some lifting it's all
going to be fine there you go here's
your Stronger by sence response
enough ham asks I want to bulk and gain
muscle but I have fears and questions
regarding it if someone yo-yo dieted
let's say for a contest or a photo shoot
and now their metabolism hasn't fully
recovered so they gained more weight and
fat that they lost now the original
deficit isn't working and they need to
go lower what's the approach there
maintain the weight gained and suck it
up till metabolism catches up or is
there a fix for that
person Greg I think as the uh preeminent
metabolism enjoyer as of recently as per
your seven part article series on macro
Factor
apps.com um I think you should be the
one to see this
off yeah
so I think I think this is tough because
what what the research on the topic
tends to
indicate is that um once people do
regain the the weight that they lose
when when dieting both both lean mass
and fat Mass um like fat Mass regaining
leptin comes back up um lean mass
regaining organ mass muscle mass like
more more metabolic more metabolically
active tissues like yeah it seems like
for the most part as people regain
tissue like whatever metabolic slowdowns
they experienced when dieting tend to
reverse um and to the extent that they
don't
um there's there's at least a hypothesis
like I don't
know I don't know how much like d direct
um empirical evidence there is for this
um I think it's I think it's a little
bit extrapolated from research on yo-yo
dieters like um like for a a subset of
people the number of diets that people
have previously attempted is predictive
of higher body weights and bmis and a
hypothesis to explain that um I think
first Advanced by Duo uh du L I believe
um is essentially that like when people
crash diet they lose fat but they also
lose lean mass and then uh after like in
the post-diet hyperphagia response
people rapidly regain weight but they
regain fat faster than they gain muscle
and so when they or just like Le mass in
general and so like when theyve returned
to their previous body weight it's now
at a higher body fat level and a lower
muscle mass level than they were
previously um and so as a result kind of
like their metabolic rate at that body
weight is a little bit slower than it
was previously and then if you repeat
that two or three more times you do wind
up with kind of like a gradual downward
Trend in metabolic rate relative to
total body mass um but yeah like I said
I'm not I'm not sure how much like
direct empirical evidence there is for
that but that that is a a hypothesis
that's floating around out there um I
do like I think that
um I suspect for the person asking this
question um it wouldn't surprise me if
some of what you're experiencing though
is more behavioral than directly
metabolic um and by that I mean like a
pretty good chunk of your energy
expenditure doesn't come from resting
metabolism it comes from energy expended
during exercise or like meat uh non-
exercise activity
thermogenesis just the amount of energy
you burn fidgeting moving around
activities of daily living Etc um and I
do think that for a lot of people once
they diet to like extreme levels of
leanness uh there's a like there's a lot
of or there can be a pretty fair bit of
like fairly intense lingering fatigue
that goes along with that like that's a
very like stressful thing to do and your
body adapts in a variety of ways to
conserve energy as you're getting leaner
and leaner and leaner and some of that
is going to be a reduction in in resting
metabolism but a lot of that is going to
be behavioral adaptations like moving
around a bit less um even and even if
like
your uh like even if your step count
doesn't change like your body gets like
a little bit more efficient at moving to
to kind of like save every calorie it
can and um I wouldn't be surprised if
some of those adaptations persist when
people begin regaining weight
uh either like kind of more direct
behavioral adaptations like you know
maybe your your overall activity levels
are a little bit lower now than they
were the last time you were around this
body weight or um potentially some more
of those like subtle but difficult to
measure uh
like difficult to measure outside of a
lab setting type of deal things where
like you know gains in global movement
economy where like whatever you do now
you're you're a little bit more effic at
doing it um I wouldn't be surprised if
something along those lines was
contributing as well um and so you know
the question
is what to do about it
and I I kind of think that's up to you
um so like in the research
on on uh weight loss maintenance which
isn't exactly what's what's going on
here but I suspect it applies at least
in an analogical Type of Way um is that
like
whatever like when people achieve a
particular body weight that they're
having difficulty maintaining basically
like the longer they maintain it the
easier it becomes to maintain it um so
like if if you are still just dealing
with some residual effects from the diet
that you were on um I do think that I
wouldn't recommend trying to diet hard
again now certainly I think probably
just spend some time at your current
weight and it should gradually become
more comfortable over time and uh when
it does and and you're feeling better
and you're thinking like hey maintaining
this weight isn't that much of a
challenge anymore then maybe you could
think about dieting again but I will
would absolutely recommend going slower
and not trying to get as lean um like I
think I think this
experience uh there there should be some
learning lessons from it like it sounds
like things didn't go as well as you may
have liked to for them to have gone uh
especially on the back end and I think a
a lot of that is just like raid an endo
like either you got way leaner than your
body is is comfortable getting or you
dieted way faster than your body is
comfortable dieting so I think if if in
the future you wanted to diet down again
probably either pull the plug uh a bit
sooner or take your time a bit
more yeah spot on um especially the last
part is something that has that
resonates with me from a coaching
standpoint because uh there have been
clients who have asked similar questions
and that was exactly more or less the
response that uh that I gave um Milo
anything to
add awesome no I think that
like maybe I'm blackpill about this and
I
think there's definitely some stuff
that's under your control but when it
comes to
metabolism and energy expenditure and
just facilitating weight loss and or
weight maintenance after weight
loss physical is great and generally
having a healthy lifestyle but I'm not
100% sure you can
do like people often talk about the
importance of Maintenance phases for
instance like between weight loss phases
and I think you can get caught up in the
specifics versus the broad Strokes you
need to follow like it doesn't need to
be a maintenance phase it doesn't need
to be a certain length it's just a
matter of sort of a function
of calories SL energy State and time
versus verus there being a prescriptive
approach that we have the research to
back up this is exactly what we should
do um so yeah I just probably agree with
Greg I think it depends on what you want
out of that situation there's different
ways to go about it nice Ashley
asks on the second warm-up episode
recently Dr Wolf mentioned that shorter
rest times maximize a hypertrophy
response despite the fact of longer rest
times often leading to Greater
performance if someone let's say a
friend of mine who is definitely not me
is a powerlifter who rest 6 or 7 Minutes
between volume squat sets are they
likely leaving gains on the table versus
someone more diligently resting only 2
minutes and possibly getting fewer reps
towards the end of their squat
work yeah that's a great question uh you
know what Greg you go first because I
want to hear your take before I
uh before I give my obviously biased
response to
myself so uh I want to hear your your
Ste man sure I think that
um I think the the
generalizability of research is
something that that always needs to be
considered um and I think that H I don't
know like I I what whatever whatever
like a pooled metaanalytic effect of
rest intervals is I would not approach
it with the assumption that those same
rest intervals and effects of those rest
intervals would apply to all exercises
all the time um and so for
instance like you know a bicep curl
versus deadlifts say and let's say
you're doing sets of 12 and like let's
just assume that you don't necessarily
need to like completely maintain
performance to the greatest degree
possible set to set to maximize the
hypertrophic response of the set but
like you probably don't want your
performance absolutely dropping off a
cliff like that's probably not ideal for
the hypertrophic response you get from
it like you do a set of 12 bicep curls
and let's say you rest a minute and a
half you take the same weight do it
again can you get 12 reps maybe maybe
not maybe you only get 10 maybe you get
nine but like you're going to perform
pretty well the next set it's going to
be okay you do a set of 12 deadlifts
with like a challenging load taking it
pretty close to failure you rest a
minute and a half you walk back up to
the bar how are you going to do on that
next set probably not [__] good like
it's it's a it's a different beast and
so
like
I I do and I think that's even more the
case as people get stronger just because
the energy cost of lifting scales with
the amount of work that's being done
work work in the physics sense and so
like if you're lifting twice as much
weight for the same number of reps the
set requires twice as much work has
roughly twice the energy cost and so um
yeah like
I I do suspect that the amount of rest
between sets necessary to maximize the
hypertrophy response from subsequent
sets is probably a little bit greater
for like particularly compound lower
body exercises for people who are quite
strong than it is for single joint
exercises or like compound exercises for
people who are weaker um and so like I
don't think you're leaving gains on the
table by resting for six or seven
minutes between sets if the total amount
of volume you're doing is the same like
I I don't know that six or seven sets is
necessary maybe the hypertrophic
response there could be maximized with
like 3 minutes between sets or four
minutes and like you're making your
session take longer but if it's uh get a
certain number of sets done in 2 hours
versus an hour 15 um I think those sets
will be just as effective if you're
resting longer between them and
depending on the exercise and your
training status potentially slightly
more so so I don't know I don't know I I
wouldn't
um I wouldn't
overgeneralize from kind of like pulled
metaanalytic results without considering
like all all of those uh all of those
contexts like and and for for this
question in particular it's asking like
lazy powerlifter I'm assuming they're
they're pretty strong doing volume squat
sets um I don't think I don't think 6 or
S minutes is is an unreasonable amount
of time to rest between sets um
personally part of that's based on
experience if I'm doing like sets of 10
squats I'm not resting 2 minutes between
sets [__] that absolutely not like if
I'm resting six or seven minutes between
sets I'm I'm getting it like I I might
be pushing it to 10 if I'm being
completely honest
uh so yeah to to me that seems fine but
what what do you think
Milo I'll give my anecdotal experience
first and that is when I am squatting
and deadlifting and I'm doing it for
like 8 to 12 reps or 5 to 10 let's say
um when I was trying to maximize load on
the bar and try to feel pretty good
going into sets yeah I'd often be
resting over 10 minutes
um when it comes to whether or not your
Miss hypertrophy my hunch is that you're
not but it's hard to say for sure so I
was specifically one of the people
involved in extracting data from the
rest time research for the meosis that
kind of found this and so I had a kind
of semi close look at well pretty close
look at all the studies included um and
to my knowledge from a recollection at
least a few of the studies did include
like squats in the sort of hypertrophy
reper range now obviously we're not
talking about highly trained lifters not
every study had that and the amount of
studies involved precluded subgroup
analysis where we looked at specifically
lower body training
Etc um but there was some research in
that
realm my hunch is that Greg is probably
right in saying that slightly longer
rest times make sense for hypotrophy for
higher reps compound work and maybe for
more advanced lifters you could go the
other way and say hey more advanced
lifters also tend to have um slightly
higher VI to Maxes or what have you and
therefore they can actually cope with
the same rest times and be fine even
though their energetic demands per set
tend to increase
um but yeah like I
think there's a possibility that
shortening and constraining your rest
times to say around 2 minutes could
actually lead to more growth versus like
10 minutes but it would be via a
mechanism that is currently unclear and
that would require substantiating before
I can make that claim confidently that's
why I think looking at the applied
empirical evidence on the outcomes of
Interest tends to be the simplest way to
kind of figure out what should I do in
practice versus thinking well yeah
generalizability might not be great here
so let's Theory craft around which
demographics and in which contexts there
might be a detriment I tend to be on the
side of ah
let's assume that there's a if there's a
decent amount of research here
and we don't have much evidence to the
contrary and the evidence we do have is
more mechanistic or acute in nature
let's assume this generalizes at least
reasonably well
um so yeah I would say you're probably
not missing on grow tldr
and you're probably fine um there is a
case
where you have finite resources like you
don't have infinite time to train and
therefore if you're spending 10 minutes
resting between sets and you only have
an hour to train you're getting five set
of squats in versus if you're resting
for 2 to 5 minutes let's say all of a
sudden you're tripling your volume
so you can make a case that for a lot of
people resting through too long can
practically reduce their hypertrophy
just via opportunity
costs but I think on principle if you
had infinite time and you wanted to rest
say 5 or 6 minutes minutes instead of
two between set squats I don't think
you're reducing hyper necessarily or at
least I couldn't say so with any
confidence that's uh that's my stance
and practically I do think most people
are better off resting somewhere in
neighborhood of 1 to 2 minutes maybe a
bit north of 2 minutes for lower body
movements because almost everyone has
some degree of time constraints involved
and so far the empirical evidence is
leading towards eh 1 to two minutes gets
you probably close to Optimal growth so
yeah that is my stance Greg what are
your thoughts yeah I I think I think uh
there
are like for for the person asking this
question I do think that there are just
like practicality considerations yeah
not even like practicality but just kind
of
like I don't know like like context I
guess the the they they said they were a
powerlifter um and so like I do
suspect that um you know it it they're
they're they're squatting for like
they're obviously trying to uh like I I
suspect trying to achieve some
hypertrophy here but also like their
performance on the squat sets probably
matters as well like they're they're
trying to get a strength effect too I
strongly suspect and so like I I do kind
of think that
um if performance is your goal like your
main lifts like this you you focus on
performance first and foremost and then
like if they do also want to get some
additional volume in for an additional
hypertrophic effect like uh yeah do some
like knee extensions or lunges or
something like that with a minute
between sets um like I I I don't know
like for for a powerlifter at asking
about squat bench deadlift
specifically I I don't think I would
ever like recommend shorter rest times I
think that um yeah like you're you're
doing that as Sports practice and like
any hypertrophy you get on top of it is
kind of like a nice little cherry on top
and then there's like other stuff you
can do in your workout to promote
hypertrophy so
I yeah like I I I think that for a
powerlifter asking this question just
like rest as long as you need to to to
perform
well cool yeah I did not get the there
was there was a tiny bit of controversy
around this this meta with rest um I
tend to view things more from a oh okay
more training flexibility turns out that
if you're pressed for time even resting
less than we thought is totally fine and
you're not going to be leaving massive
gains on the table but um people seem to
to take this as a sort of like okay okay
this is the new heart cut um rest period
limit and if you're resting above 2
minutes based on this meta you are I
don't know doing something wrong but uh
yeah moving on to
Mason hey guys this is a question for
the sports fans um I'm sure we've all
seen where a player in a major
professional sports League sustains an
injury and uh if you look at the
comments on Reddit or any other social
media
a Litany of the comments will suggest
that you know the players on Peds or all
players are on Peds it's stuff we don't
know about it's better uh it's different
mechanisms that don't affect hormones
and you know it's really something that
I've seen become more prevalent of a
discussion just in the last couple years
you know you really can't go to
basically any comment section without
seeing that and so I was wondering how
feasible is it that you know there
really are these super drugs out here
that you know these players have access
to that we're not even really familiar
with so I think this is the is a classic
question around any sort of professional
sporting event where it's assumed that
oh okay all professional athletes at a
very high level are on some form of PDs
because they are exceptional at what
they do and because there is a monetary
there's a financial incentive to them
performing really well um I empathize
with that because we've seen you know
many popular athletes in the Olympics
for example and I'll just use you know a
couple of Greeks Greek athletes as as an
example um where you know you often hear
cases of people at a very high level
being caught on PDS eventually after
years where they were testing uh they
were testing clean um but as far as
super drugs that are out there that um
people have access to I don't think
whether that's true and I wouldn't
necessarily assume that every
professional athlete out there is on PDS
especially in uh countries where PDS are
illegal and depending on their Sport and
the drug testing protocols that they
follow that can sometimes be very
difficult do I think that every
professional a athlete out there is
completely drug free and there's no
chance that they are potentially doing
something um behind the scenes that is
not want uh in accordance to the drug
testing and the drug use uh Federation
laws or whatever they they're following
no but I don't think that it's a
productive sort of um a
productive exercise for anybody to to
try and deduct whether professional
athletes are in PDS because at the end
of the day professional athletes are
where they are because they are also in
you know genetic anomalies as uh as far
as their sport is concerned so chances
are that many of them are not on PDS and
even if they are unless you find out
about it explicitly through a drug test
I don't think it really changes much um
your
thoughts yeah I I agree with that um I I
think
that I don't know I
I I see where this comes from but I
think that
um I think that it would it would do a
lot of people a lot of good to just
learn more about modern drug
testing because you can you can get a
pretty good idea of like the type of
stuff that people could get away with if
you know the types of testing protocols
that they're under um and yeah like I
think I think that would probably give
people like a a pretty decent indication
because
like I I do think people dramatically
underestimate how good the
best modern like motivated to catch
cheaters style drug testing is um I
think people still have have in their
mind kind of the the Balco era or um
like Lance Armstrong like being like
never failing a test while winning a
bunch of tour to Frances or whatever and
just just having this
idea that
um yeah that like the the cheaters are
always ahead of the testers and kind of
it it is what it is but I I do think
it's important to note like like highly
motivated well-resourced drug testing is
a lot newer than than I think people
realize um if memory
serves and it may not I may be off by
one Olympiad but I think I think 1988
was the first Olympics where performance
enhancing drugs were actually
banned and uh 92 or 96 was the first
Olympics where like a lot of people were
actually tested and then it was like
another Olympiad when kind of like
offseason testing became um like much
more common and so like I don't know
when like when Lance Armstrong was doing
his things like drug like drug testing
was kind of new like they they Ed been
doing it for that long uh and like
similar with like uh like the Balco
Scandal um and now there's like three
decades of folks improving quite a lot
and like this is already this is already
a bit of a dated reference which makes
me feel kind of old but like uh as of
I think 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics um
you know when you have the the Russian
State apparatus trying to help its
athletes be able to use gear and beat
tests uh what was the
state-of-the-art drug protocol that they
came up with to help their athletes do
that oh wait they didn't have one it was
literally just like passing cups of piss
back and forth between a hole in a wall
to like swap it out with clean urine
like that's as of
2014 the way that like a highly
resourced motivated State actor decided
like this is our best method for beating
drug tests like basically we beat the
drug test by not even trying to beat the
drug tests um cuz like they're they're
pretty good and So like
um yeah I think so a couple things can
really dictate the quality of a testing
protocol one is just simply the types of
tests that they do so um a big one for
people like in in sports where they
might want to use androgens is um do
they ever or with any frequency use
carbon isotope ratio testing like it
just has a much longer detection window
than the kind of like standard uh
testosterone to epitestosterone ratio
test it's also far more sensitive um
than than those tests and so like if
it's a sport that doesn't do any cir
testing like folks can
um oh not like not micro do that's
that's people using like mushrooms and
[__] but like they they can use like low
doses of stuff and just keep their TD
ratio below whatever the cut off is for
the sport typically 4 to1 and just kind
of like get away with it um so yeah
that's that's something to look for if
they just do ratio testing yeah there's
probably lot of people using low Doses
and getting away with it like that that
was kind of the the Lance Armstrong
method
um another big one is like are they
storing samples because um like tests
are getting better and they are analytes
that people either didn't know to test
for or couldn't test for at some point
in the past and then they figure out how
to test for them and then you can go
back and retest samples and a lot of
people get get popped on retests so that
um like in
2014 I believe there were um better
tests uh made for some of the fast
acting steroids that uh or like not fast
acting steroids but steroids with short
half-lies that a lot of Olympic athletes
particularly weightlifters were using um
and so then when they went and retested
samples from 2008 and 2012 it was an
absolute blood bath and there were there
were some Division I think there was
like one weight class where like the
person who finished fifth ended up with
the gold medal because like everyone
else got popped on
retests um and just knowing knowing that
um like samples are being stored and
that you can like be sued for like prize
money you won and like metals and
accolades and whatnot being stripped um
I think does function at least as some
degree of deterrence from people wanting
to use stuff that maybe couldn't be
detected now but you have sufficient
reason to believe might be able to be
detected in the future um and then the
last one and this is a really big one is
just like what what are the details of
the testing protocol and like when
people can be tested so do you have true
random unannounced testing year round in
ways that don't have loopholes that
someone could drive a truck through um
and and if you aren't were you said you
would be for a test are there
consequences uh and So like um if you're
in the testing pool for Olympic sports
in the US like this applies to you um
you have to let usada know about your
whereabouts essentially
24/7 and if you're not there for a test
uh you're you're in trouble I think like
two misted tests are are treated as a
positive test like treated as as a
adverse analytical inference
um and so yeah like in sports
where you maybe have some time away from
testing or
um like if if there's like too big of a
window like in the evenings so like for
oh I'm sure I'm sure I'm going to get
these details wrong but with with usada
for instance I think essentially your
kind of like free time is like midnight
to 6:00 a.m. like they're not going to
knock on your apartment door at like
3:00 a.m. and say like hey wake up you
got to piss um but yeah so I think you
have like a 6-hour window at night where
yeah you can like if if you wanted to
maybe like use a little growth hormone
or something like something with like a
a short halflife like short detection
window you could like maybe
theoretically try to get away with it
although I think I think they're getting
better at testing for peptides now too
like this is also a few years ago but I
remember they they popped Pat Mendes
twice for growth hormone which honestly
surprised me um and something I've heard
like in the cycling world is that they
've gotten a lot better at testing for
EPO which is another like peptide
hormone with a short half-life short
like short glow time is what what the
cyclist would call it um and so now like
people who are trying to do stuff like
that are just going back to like classic
blood doping where you just kind of like
extract your blood spin down the red
blood cells and and re-inject them
instead of uh trying to take exogenous
substances to achieve the same effect
because they're they're getting better
at testing for them but but yeah so like
if there's um you know if if instead of
like 6 hours at night there's like 14
hours at night like if uh if you knew
that from like I don't
know 10 p.m. until noon you're not going
to have a tester show up then like ah
you could probably get away with using
low doses of some stuff and not getting
popped and then uh the big one is just
like are there gaps in the testing
calendar um and so like
I don't want to tell Tales out of school
because I don't have like a perfect
memory of every of every Sports testing
protocol but like I know for some of
them they don't test over the summer
like if um like once the season gets
done the testers might show up when you
show up to training camp again um but
from the end of the season until kind of
like the start of the next pre-season
you're good like you you could do
whatever you wanted there's no offseason
testing
um and I don't know if this is still the
case in the NBA but I know that in the
the prior collective bargaining
agreement the details of the testing
protocol were basically that like each
player would be tested five times per
year and could only be tested five times
per year that was like something that
the Players Association kind of like got
in the CBA and that the last day you
could be tested was the last day of the
regular season which essentially meant
that like once you get tested for the
fifth time have fun uh like you you
could do whatever the [__] you wanted or
um you know at the end of the regular
season like you want to you want to tune
up for the playoffs or uh you know if
you're maybe differently motivated and
it was back when uh marijuana was a
banned substance by the league it's like
yeah you want to have some fun in the
playoffs like there's there's things you
can do all of which is to say like in a
situation like that I still don't think
everyone's doing gear but like there's
[__] loopholes where you know like uh
like announcers talk about oh like the
the the young teams have like the fresh
legs in the regular season but uh the
playoffs is when like experience and
champ Championship pedigree and like the
veterans really shine it's like well I
think there's a lot of that like
experience being on that stage before
but also maybe if you're a little a
little older you have a little less
endurance you've lost some pep in your
step but now the season's over and you
can uh take some stuff to roll the clock
back a little bit who knows who knows
like that might contribute to Veterans
being able to step up in the playoffs
who who can say all of which is to say
um yeah all of those things make a
difference like I I do think that like
really
um if a sport has like motivated
well-funded drug testing where they're
doing random unannounced tests year
round using the best analytical methods
and storing samples for retests
like it's not that it's impossible to
cheat but like it's [__] hard and
like the the way the way that people do
it when they do is mostly just trying to
make it like like not lying about what
their whereabouts are but just making it
difficult for folks to come out to to
test them like um like that's a big
thing in like distance running where
like um they're like basically if you're
an American runner like there
are certain countries around the world
where like their local testing bodies
like effectively don't exist like their
version of usada just doesn't give a
[__] like doesn't really test anyone and
so like you could go train in your
offseason there and like truthfully tell
usada like hey I'm in this country
training like during my offseason and
like they don't have the budget to put a
usada tester on the plane and send them
over there and like the local testing
authorities probably aren't going to do
anything so it's like yeah like you beat
test by not getting tested and like that
that is kind of the meta cuz be like the
if you're getting tested like the tests
are good and it's very very difficult to
beat them um and like yeah like Olympic
athletes and like athletes in sports
with like w tier
testing aren't as far as I'm aware
really aren't trying to beat the test by
like using stuff and not getting C like
most of the time they're trying to beat
the test by dodging the testers um and
like finding those loopholes to go
places for long periods of time where no
one's going to show up to test them um
but like the the tester [__] hard to
beat if it's a sport that is just doing
like kind of a a basic panel like if if
they're doing the style of testing that
was being done to Lance Armstrong in the
90s like yeah people people can beat
those tests like they beat them all the
time um and yeah there are probably more
people using drugs in those Sports and
getting away with it and then the
testing window is a big one like if the
sport has a limit on how often in a year
someone can be tested once people hit
that limit I suspect some of them are I
suspect more people in sports like that
are using gear than people in other
styles of sports so all of which is to
say I think it varies sport by Sport and
I think you can get a decent idea of
what it looks like based on like reading
about and thoroughly understanding the
testing protocol but I definitely don't
think all pro athletes are on gear and I
think the ones that are aren't aren't
using like crazy Advanced [__] that's
like impossible to detect and test for I
think the I think the ones that are
using it are just like competing in
leagues that have LAX testing protocols
and they're using testosterone and like
EPO and just like growth hormone and
normal ass [__] like I don't think I
don't think like the black market
chemists are like way ahead of the
testers and uh like I like that that
that is not the vector where that war is
being waged like it's
mostly about just trying to get laxer
testing protocols or figuring out how to
not get tested like that's that's kind
of where things are at right now because
modern tests are really [__] good y
100% and people also need to remember
that you know there's multiple different
layers um as far as like the people
involved in professional sports
including sponsors um whatever
shareholders y y y and
I very much doubt that you can be
transparent with anything uh you know
AAS or ped related so it's it's unlikely
that there's a big conspiracy where they
have access to this super lab and
everybody's on the same page and they're
like yep we're rocking it behind the
scenes and we have access to these very
Advanced substances I think it's a case
by case basis rather than every team
agreeing that you know we're all going
to keep quiet about this
yeah no I I agree wholeheartedly and I
think like I don't know I think some
sports leagues probably do just want
people to be able to use stuff cuz like
it's putting a better product on the
field um but yeah I don't know I I do I
do think it varies like I I I think a
lot of it is just like cultural like
different sports have different cultures
um and
um yeah I don't I don't know like I I
think that
um I like I I
understand the position that like oh if
there's all of this money on the line
like everyone's going to be doing
everything they can um to to secure the
bag and get that contract but like I do
think it's worth keeping in mind that
that sort
of um
like I don't know
the like like I think it's I think it's
more along the lines of like people are
just kind of more most likely to do what
they feel like they have to do to kind
of like advance and and keep the ball
rolling so like I don't know someone
who's uh like a a good athlete in high
school but maybe like not quite good
enough to get a D1 offer in college
might say like maybe I need to use some
chemical enhancement to like get there
but then like by the time they get there
if they needed to use gear to get there
they're probably not going to be a
standout like they barely they barely
made it to that level and the people
that were able to get to that level
without having to do the same stuff
they're they're going to leave them in
the dust like continue to develop better
and then like you know the folks who are
going to get drafted to the pros that
don't need that like don't need to use
[__] to do it like
they're not going to like that's or like
they're going to be less likely to
that's an unnecessary risk but like some
people that are there kind of On The
Fringe might say yeah I got to do what I
got to do to like get my foot in the
door like make it to the league whatever
but then like again once they once they
get there if they had to go down that
road to barely make it they're probably
not going to be a standout and then like
yeah the the folks who are like uh maybe
competing for that second contract or
like you know getting some time in the
rotation like getting some playing time
but like they're not quite they're like
yeah maybe they're like essentially if
you need to do some [__] like I think
that a lot of people will do some [__]
but I if you don't like it's it's an
unnecessary risk
um and I don't I don't know like I I
don't I don't think people are going to
especially now that like in a lot of
sports the banss for
performance-enhancing drugs like the
suspensions and what not are like much
much longer I do think that the risk to
reward calculus like
isn't isn't what it once was like I I do
like I think peev use is like pretty
widespread but I think like if I'm
just taking a guess I think probably
between like a quarter and a half of pro
athletes are using [__] maybe like maybe
up to 23s I don't think it's I don't
think it's anywhere close to 100% like
not not like I yeah I I like I think
it's I think it's a size a sizable
minority um like I don't think it's
unheard of but I don't think it's like
completely pervasive
everywhere that's that's my
hunch everybody's a fake nty you heard
it here
first yeah
um shall we jump to the last the last
question forever I guess for the Pod or
at least for the foreseeable
future yes sir let's do it so max Thomas
asks what would your general
recommendation be for a teenager who's
15 and is trying to gain muscle and
strength at the same time uh in terms of
exercise selection weekly volume uh rep
ranges
um
intensity uh and kind of effort as well
so like r like going to failure all the
way or not um and also what the
nutrition side should look like so
calories kind of how much of a surplus
and what the macro spread should be yeah
that' be great hm loaded question thank
you so much for asking dear listener and
I will do my best to give you a short
response that covers sort of everything
you've asked for
so assuming you are the teenager in
question uh first of all congratulations
on embarking on your lifting journey and
listening to Stronger by science if this
is for somebody else congratulations to
them I'd say that um I started lifting
around that time as well around 15 or 16
and unfortunately I was not a stronger
by science U listener nor a strength
Theory follower at the time I not sure
if that even existed but for many of us
felter we just ended up doing whatever
however in your case um I would
recommend that you
start by
doing a plethora of exercises that are
compound exercises um including classic
exercises like the squat the bench press
the overhead press the deadlift the row
but also while using um machine
exercises if you have access to them as
a general rule of thumb picking out two
to three exercises per major muscle
group should cover you as far as
exercise selection and do more than that
um and the only reason I'm recommending
learning some of the Classic Barber
lifts is that I think they can allow you
to become uh to become better at certain
movement patterns that can then allow
you to be very versatile in terms of
your overall um exercise selection in
the future so like learning how to
deadlift learning how to squat learning
how to bench PR learning how to overhead
press and and barbell row then you have
so many different variations and other
exercises with that involve similar
movement patterns um and in general it
will make your life uh a bit easier
additionally they are fun um exercises
to learn but keep in mind that if for
whatever reason you don't like any of
those lifts or their variations you
could very well just do any machine
exercise and do two or three machine
exercises for any for all your um muscle
groups and be covered as far as weekly
volume goes I would start on the low end
so I would do somewhere around 8 to 12
fractional sets per muscle group per
week uh whereas where you'd count um
like a set of bench PR or a pushing
exercise as half a set for your tricep
and a full set one set for the prime
mover in that in that case stay
somewhere in the five to 12 maybe 5 to
15 but I'd recommend personally staying
in the 5 to 12 range just so that you
can get uh so you can feel confident
that you know that you're truly training
close to failure I would keep most
things in the zero to two reps in
reserve Mark um as a rule of thumb maybe
60 to 70% around the 1 to2 rir Mark and
then having the remainder uh 30 or 40%
uh to failure so you get familiar with
what failure uh feels like and you know
if you're really trying to push yourself
and progress there will be cases where
you'll just naturally go to failure as
far as um your nutrition um I would say
that gaining roughly 1% of your body
weight per month while doing your best
to consume enough a good amount of
protein per meal will cover you anywhere
uh from 1.5 to 2 gram per kilo of body
weight uh as far as your protein intake
your daily protein intake goes will
cover you although you can go even
higher and potentially see even better
gains but I wouldn't necessarily given
that this question is posed for a
15-year-old overly stress the nutrition
side of things as long as you're
steadily gaining body weight um because
it is the training that will be the main
stimulus here and the the potent
stimulus even if let's say you you know
assume you're not cooking by yourself or
you may not have access to high protein
meals even if you're doing your best to
have whatever food you have at home or
at your school cafeteria and you are you
know eating a bit more here and there
and seeing the scale go up while doing
your best to have some protein source
with each meal it's very unlikely that
you're not going to make amazing gains
uh assuming you're in the gym uh every
week as far as training frequency
anywhere like even if you did two
sessions per week that would be fine but
I'd recommend being somewhere in the
three to five U session Mark per week
and a good way to address many of those
points would be to just download uh
any training any free training templates
that are out there you can also check
out the SPs training programs and in
general having some sort of um rough
template or idea of what you're doing uh
will likely be better than just taking
what I said and sort of trying to
Freestyle it uh on your own but that's
that's also fine um supplements just to
mention I'm not sure how much you've
seen but besides creatin monohydrate and
I don't know if that's allowed for for
your age or what's what's the deal in in
different countries and jurisdictions so
I'm not going to put myself in any sort
of legal risk here but in general that
aside it's legal
everywhere is I don't know if it's like
if there's a specific age where you can
buy supplements I'm I'm not sure okay
maybe yeah whatever you know better safe
than sorry um but regardless though my
recommendation even if uh there's no
issue with your age and and buying
supplements is that you don't
necessarily need any supplements do your
best to eat mostly Whole Foods
unprocessed Foods eat plenty of
vegetables and fruits whenever you can
and you are likely going to be more than
covered that's my shsh tldr for our
listener I'm glad I hope you remember me
when you're an ifbb Pro on stage and say
hey remember that bold guy on that
podcast yeah I didn't listen to of that
and look at me now ifbb Pro Max
Thomas yeah I I agree with all of that
um the one thing that I would
potentially add is for new lifters in in
particular um I'm I'm a big fan of uh of
body weight training and calisthenics I
think it's I think it's very helpful
just just
to um you know not just not just learn
how to exert a lot of force with your
muscles but
also get a feel and kinesthetic sense
for like where your body is in space and
how to how to feel it and control it um
I I just think that that's a helpful
skill to have where you know I I do
think
this is like complete this is a complete
Bro Science belief but I I do think that
just having uh having better kinesthetic
sense and kinesthetic awareness will
help in the future make other training
you do more effective just you have
better control over your body and if you
want to like slightly tweak and exercise
to Target a particular muscle or part of
the range of motion or whatever like
just you you'll have a better feel for
that I can't see why that would be a bad
thing um and then two like as as you're
learning it's not it's not that uh like
free weights or resistance training is
like particularly dangerous because it's
not like injury injury rates are lower
than like most other sports or active
hobbies that people would have but like
they exist like they're they're
non-negligible and um I do think
that using less external loading early
on while you're learning to exercise and
and push yourself will probably help
mitigate some of those risks at least to
some degree so
um uh when I worked at a gym and was
training um like a lot of the young
athletes who were signing up like these
were a lot of like 13 14-year-old kids
who' never lifted before but they were
basketball players football players like
wanted to wanted to get under heavy
weights and get big and whatnot for
their sport um one of the things that I
always liked to see was like 20 good
strict body weight push-ups before we
lay down on the bench because like hey
if your body weight is a sufficient
enough challenge there's no reason you
need to add external resistance to it
like you can you can get a good workout
there um
and so yeah like I I think that uh I
think that a lot of free weights are
great but I think that you should get
really comfortable um with things like
push-ups body weight lunges
step-ups um and like once you can do all
of those
for like you know you don't have to be
able to do them till the cows come home
but like 15 20 good strict reps then I
do think you who will probably have kind
of a better a better body sense um more
of a like a better understanding of the
feeling of like pushing yourself um and
and what like a challenging set should
feel like before you add a lot of
external load into the picture so yeah I
I agree with all of Pack's
recommendations and I think if if you've
already been Lifting for like a year or
whatever and you're just looking for
advice on how to continue improving uh
completely disregard that but if you are
like if if you're a young kid or even
like in your 20s or 30s and you've never
spent much time in the gym before like I
do think uh I I do I do think it's
generally advisable to start off with
exercises that don't require much of any
external loading get what you can out of
your body weight and then progress from
there to to barbell or or dumbbell or
machine exercises
at least for like compound stuff
for like if you're if you're trying to
get jacked like don't try to figure out
how to do like body weight bicep
training like do absolutely grab like
dumbbells or hop on the machines for for
curls but yeah for for things like binge
press or like compound lower body
exercises like you know see see what you
can do with body weight stuff first and
then uh fill in the gaps for like
accessory lifts with with dumbbells and
machines that's that's what I would
generally
recommend I think it's really solid
there's uh not too much to be added the
one thing I'll say is the specific
exercises you pick and the specific sets
and Reps you
do probably don't matter all that much
in the grand scheme of things it's a lot
more about finding exercises you enjoy
and whatever keeps you in the gym doing
it pretty hard over time finding a way
to make it harder over time like adding
a rep every session even if it's just an
intention to add a rep that'll go a long
way same with adding weight it doesn't
need to be the bar bench press it can be
any variation of chest pressing that you
personally enjoy don't let yourself be
constrained by barbells machines
just especially for muscle growth do
what you enjoy find something you enjoy
and stick with it ultimately for you to
get anywhere in the gym you need to be
doing it for long enough and the only
way you'll keep doing that is if you
actually enjoy it um I know it's
tempting to always prioritize results
over everything else but there is very
much a time and a place to figure out
what you enjoy and do that for as long
as you enjoy it and when you don't enjoy
it anymore find another way to do it
you're probably not going to be married
to one style of training forever you're
not going to be enjoying one thing
forever but if you're enjoying it right
now just keep doing it for the most part
and then when you don't switch and
that's the way to stay in the gym for a
long time time and for long enough for
anything like any of this to even matter
in the first place so yeah I think we uh
we did a pretty good job coverting all
this
pack yeah 100% man at the end of the day
fall in love with lifting and the like
as long as you're not doing anything
wild the rest will come so definitely
echoing
Milo absolutely all right if there's
nothing else I think that does it for
this the final episode of the main run
of the stronger by science podcast again
don't unsubscribe there might be a
random episode here or there just don't
expect one two weeks from now but if you
do still want uh audio content on more
of a predictable Cadence check out our
newsletter Stronger by science.com
newsletter where we will be doing um
monthly Q a episodes much like this one
uh for newsletter
subscribers uh so that's it uh
thanks to everyone for listening uh not
just to this episode but to the 143
episodes prior um we love you we
appreciate you uh good gains great
training and we'll we'll see you on the
other
side peace w
[Music]